---
title: "Tom Nairn and Ireland"
date: 2023-02-16T20:50:00Z
draft: false
tags:
  - Nairn
  - Ireland
  - Marxism
---
<p>A note on terminology: Nairn uses the term 'Protestants' rather than 'unionists' and Ulster rather than 'the six counties' as 'Ulster'.</p> 

<p>In the opening paragraphs of his chapter on Ireland Tom Nairn outlines his understanding of the conflict in the six counties. From his point of view it is a conflict between two communities, both of which are separate from Westminster and Leinster House, neither of whom are invested in it going one way or the other. 'Had great-power interests been involved' he writes, 'a solution of some sort would have been imposed long ago'. </p>

<p>This is not an analysis that coincides with the facts. Successive British governments, both Labour and Conservative, directed their army, their intelligence services and loyal subjects in the press to enthusiastically support those in the six counties who wished to remain within the Union. This support took the form of arms, training for loyalist paramilitaries, a uniquely brutal police force, targeted assassinations of prominent members in the nationalist community, conspiring against figures in Leinster House they regarded as sympathtic to the cause of unification, bombing Dublin and Monaghan. </p>

<p>Nairn's case rests on a single concept: 'development', which is to bear much of the weight of the weight of his conceptual apparatus. Dialectical materialists would be conditioned to understanding development as a process through which objective factors determine the ways in which which social structures emerge, develop and transform themselves into novel assemblages over time. We understand this is not an absolute trajectory along which all societies travel along smoothly; the movement from each of these moments are fraught with contradiction and long-term consequences that escape the intention or even the understanding of its agents. In order to understand them we have to begin with historical particulars or the whole point of seeking to command an abstract overview of historical processes is lost. We are also accustomed to understanding this method under capitalism as a zero-sum game, as the development of mercantile and industrial capitalism across Europe coincided with the invasion, enslavement and mass deaths of hundreds of millions of deaths of peoples in America, Asia and Africa. In this way we understand that it is not possible to discuss development in reified terms as something that is isolated from broader developments beyond a nation's borders. For cultural, national and historical reasons, it will be different in different places and at different times. For Nairn, development is a single, irrevocable thing that goes forward through a series of pre-determined stages and does nothing else. </p>

<p>In Nairn's story of Ireland's modernisation there is a surfeit of pub talk about how it gave up the crown for the Holy Ghost and a defecit of material on how this might have been effected by the Saorstát remaining an imperial formation, bound by the terms of the so-called Anglo-Irish Treaty and a bourgeoisie ensuring continuity from a social and economic perspective and postwar American hegemony dictating open markets and that the Saorstát be re-fashioned as a beach head into European markets. Nairn can describe unionists, as a people, as 'highly industrialised' because as a majority population in a statelet where there is a relatively large amount of industry, their demands for self-determination are de facto progressive, modern, woven into an advanced capitalist order, as opposed to the backwards claims of an underdeveloped Irish, which, in a charming turn of phrase, he encapsulates as 'the priest and the potato'.</p> 

<p>Nairn has no patience for the idea that the six counties can be analysed as an imperial setting, citing the notion that the partition of Ireland through the Government of Ireland act as an attempt to stymie Irish independence as a simplistic, conspiratorial and 'pseudo-Marxist' account. Nairn seems particularly irked that this model would challenge his development narrative, as it undermines the role of the authentically progressive actors here, 'the largest proletariat in (geographical) Ireland', framing them as lackeys of British imperialism, rather than a nation-for-itself. Nairn excoriates the likes of Eamon McCann, the Official IRA and People's Democracy whose programmes advocated (with varying degrees of ingenuousness) for a unity of unionist and nationalist on the basis of a shared class interest, accusing them of being beholden to a cult of martyrdom surrounding James Connolly and the mistaken notion that a national revolution can be transformed into a social one. Nairn also cites the clowncar of Conor Cruise O'Brien and the British and Irish Communist Organisation to this effect.</p>

<p>Nairn argues that the six counties are an entirely neutral outgrowth of this development gap. How remote hinterland of Tyrone could be called developed in 1922 is beyond me, but he does also happen to be incorrect here. Loyalist leaders such as Edward Carson hoped for the entire nine-county province of Ulster but the calculus was made that the garrison state would be unsustainable were it to include the significant nationalist populations of Cavan, Donegal and Monaghan. That this was a pragmatic decision is further evinced by unionist leaders speculating during the long war that the restive South Armagh could be traded with the Saorstát for more scenic parts of Donegal.</p>

<p>Nairn seems confused on this point. While he might on the one hand Nairn might dismiss the idea that the unionist population are settlers in the same way Rhodesians or the pieds noirs are, he admits at the same time that they share many of the same socio-cultural features in common; namely cross-class alliances and racial bigotry. For some reason Nairn is wedded to the idea that the only form of imperialism that exists today is that of capital investments from metropolian or core countries, which have an interest in abolishing borders and eliminating racist dominance as well as ethnic feuds. Nairn of course never tells us what countries these multi-nationals are based in because this would require him to admit that they are not nationless entities falling out of the sky, but rather arise out of a lot of the same countries with a history of putting other nations beneath the yoke. What follows is a useless series of riffs about how unionists feel and behave, without bringing into the picture their particular class composition, their specific relationship with multinational capital, what kinds of industry are present in the six counties, how Catholics relate to them, whether or not being chased out of shipyards might have something to do with Catholics being under-represented in the largest proletariat on the island. Unfortunately, when it comes to Ireland, Nairn was strictly vibes only, preferring to throw around references to bowler hats and Finn MacCool as if this was acceptable. </p>

<p>In Nairn's view there is much to celebrate about the unionist working class; the 1974 Ulster Worker's Council Strike ('without doubt the most successful political action carried out by any European working class since the World War') is a clear indicator of their capacity to make the Ulster nation and relegate the claims of the IRA to the dustbin of history. That this was a strike aimed to overturn a constitutional settlement that would have granted the nationalist population some say in the running of the statelet in which they found themselves is not mentioned. Of course Nairn is frustrated at the many ways in which his progressive force is showing itself to be regressive, with their throwbacks to seventeenth century anti-Catholicism, which is a regrettable exception of course, nothing to do with the plantations. The only solution, believe it or not, is to guarantee the unionists their own nation, seeing this as the only way of breaking them from their reactionary views and religiosity.  </p>

<p>Nairn accuses those socialists who would fail to agree with him of being philistines, but philistines in good company, belonging to a pedigree stretching back to Marx and Engels, whose conception of self-determination was moralising as it depended on granting it in some contexts, withdrawing it in others. The national question cannot be viewed separately from the confrontation from imperialism. Self-determination is about wounding the vampire squid in as many place as you can, to strengthen leverage against it at all points. If it's withdrawn in some cases and offered in others, one could look at why. Extra-territorial claims maybe. A history of expropriation and / or genocide, paramilitary violence. Crimes against humanity. Or maybe I'm wrong and once they were in power the Bolsheviks should have allowed Germany to annex as much territory as they wanted.</p>

<p>That Nairn can write a sentence about the activity of the British government in 1972 and chose to argue that it breaks the 'long British tradition of relucant, last-minute intervention in Irish affairs', about sums it up. Nairn set out to write a book about Britain. In his section on England's first colony, the key to understanding everything that has happened since, he has revealed himself to not only lack the most basic command over the materials, but has split his model apart in trying to fit the evidence. He then spends forty pages moping over the pieces. Anyone who presents this book as a guide for the Union over the next number of decades is proudly announcing their intention to charge down a blind alley. </p>